## Getting Started ##

Experience in-browser computing on your own device, just follow the steps below. No programming necessary.

This tutorial has been written to work with the Alpha version of #UVMComputes available at [alpha.uvmcomputes.org](https://alpha.uvmcomputes.org). Access to this website is limited as it is still in the early development stages.

A username and password may be required to access the application. To request access contact the lead developer, Rachel Dotey at rdotey@uvm.edu.

### Important Development Alert ###
> Currently, alpha.uvmcomputes.org has been configured to run 100% locally in your browser.This means no data will be sent or received to or from your browser. 
>  - Jobs are not being sent from the server. The only code being processed on your device are jobs that you have created. If you haven't created any jobs than the #UVMComputes is currently idle. 
>  - User account or projects are not being saved. You will need to recreate your user account if you log out. 
>  - Nothing is uploaded to the server when you select python files to create a job. Instead the #UVMComputes uploads your application into memory and runs the job 100% locally. Your jobs are run by your device.
>
> This is temporary while we complete development and testing.

## Simple Python Demo ##

### 1. Download sample .py script ###

Start by downloading the [hello_world.py](py/hello_world.py) file from the [py](py/) directory. 

```
def hi() :
    return "Hello world!"

hi()
```

As you can see, it's a very basic python program that returns the string `Hello world!` when run. The output generated by program will always be `Hello world!`.

### 2. Create a user account ####

To upload code to [uvmcomputes.org](https://alpha.uvmcomputes.org) you will need to create a researcher account. To do that visit the registration page at alpha.uvmcomputes.org/register

Fill in the following form fields with your own information:
 - First Name
 - Last Name
 - Username
 - Email
 - Password
 - Confirm Password

Hint: Use an email associated with a [Gravatar](https://en.gravatar.com/) account for your profile image. This is free and completely optional.

> ***Temporary local only mode***
> *Remember this is a temporary account that exists on your browser. If get logged out, just recreate your account.*

If you are not automatically redirected to your [Researcher Dashboard](https://alpha.uvmcomputes.org/dashboard) you can find it using the drop down navigation in the top menu, on the right side.

###  3. Create new project ####

Once logged in, go to the [New Project](https://alpha.uvmcomputes.org/new/project) page to add your first research project. You can find links to this page on your [Researcher Dashboard](https://alpha.uvmcomputes.org/dashboard) or in the drop down menu on the right side of the top navigation.

To create your first project fill in the following form fields with your own information:
 - Project Name - This must be unique to your account, though other users can have a project with the same name of their own.
 - Project URL friendly slug - Project slug may only contain alphanumeric characters or single hyphens, and cannot begin or end with a hyphen. This must be unique to your account, though other users can have a project with the same url slug of their own.
 - Description - Used as preview content for your project.
 - Research README - Markdown formatted full length about page for your research project. 

> *Remember this is a temporary project for testing purposes.*

Submit the form to create your new project and you will be redirected your new project's page. On your projects page you can create new project jobs, view job status, and download job output once complete.

If you are not redirected you can find your projects listed on your [Researcher Dashboard](https://alpha.uvmcomputes.org/dashboard) or on the [Explore](https://alpha.uvmcomputes.org/explore) page.

###  4. Upload .py code and create a new job ####

The purpose of the research project is to contain jobs that are run in-browser. To add a job select the `hello_world.py` file downloaded in step number 1 of this tutorial using the `Browse` button. 

> Currently only single file applications are supported by #UVMComputes but multiple file selection is on the improvement list. 

After selecting your Python file click `Create a Job` to add a new job with default settings.

###  What is going on under the hood? ###

 - When you upload a program, #UVMComputes loads your .py into memory and creates one or more jobs using that app. Your job(s) are given priority to run first on your device and are added to your queue. The status of the job is updated as it progresses through the queue and being processed. 

 - Once ready, the #UVMComputes processor selects the next job from the queue. That job Python is loaded into memory, verified, and settings are initialized for the job execution. 

 - The Pyodide runtime is initialized if it hasn't been already (setup on the first run). Pyodide is fed the job .py application. Pyodide is responsible for executing the Python code and supplying output. 

 - The #UVMComputes processor takes the output from Pyodide. Verifies that it executed successfully. If an error did occur, it saves the error as the job output, and sets the status to `Error`. 

> *Remember that all "saving" is temporary and local only.*

 - If running the application was successful #UVMComputes marks job as complete, saves the output, and sets the status to `Complete`. The user will be able to watch the status change in the `Computational Processing Jobs` table. Once complete the output will be available for download by a link.

 - As long as there are jobs in the queue, #UVMComputes will continue to process each one by one before requesting more from the central queue.

> *Remember that job processing local only. Your jobs wont run if you aren't on the alpha.uvmcomputes.org*

###  5. View processing indicator ####

Your new job will appear in the `Computational Processing Jobs` table below the `Create a new job` form on the project page. 

Here you can watch the job status as it waits in your local queue, is processed by your device using #UVMComputes, and then is marked as completed where you can download the application results.

###  6. Download output ####

Once complete, job output will be listed in the `Computational Processing Jobs` table. Click the link to download a .txt version of that jobs output.

##  Report a bug or issue ##

If you have uncovered a problem please take a minute to [report it here](https://github.com/racheldotey/uvmcomputes-docs/issues/new) so we can continue improving the application. 

When describing a problem be sure to include *what type of device* you have (PC/Mac/iPhone/etc..) and *what browser* (Chrome/FireFox/etc..) you were using at the time. 

Providing as much detail as possible about what you we're doing when the bug occurred is greatly appreciated by the developer who will be debugging the problem. Thank you in advance! 

##  Feedback ##

We are always open to your [feedback](https://github.com/racheldotey/uvmcomputes-docs/issues).
